What is npm?
npm comes with the Node.js platform and allows for seamless Node.js package management. npm (all lower case) consists of three main components:

Website: https://www.npmjs.com
Command-line tool: npm
Registries: public and private
The npm command-line tool is the package manager for Node and it is bundled with the Node platform (you don't have to install it separately from Node).

The registries are where the packages (a.k.a. modules) are stored. Developers download packages from the npm registry and publish their packages to the registry.

The website provides a web-based graphical interface to search for modules and find their meta information (how many downloads there were, who is the author or what is the documentation).

Installing Node.js Modules with npm
The way npm install works is similar to Git in the way that it traverses the working tree to find a current project. For starters, keep in mind that we need either the package.json file or the node_modules folder to install modules locally with npm install name.

For example, to install a package called superagent:

In existing project, skip this step but in a new project, create a package.json first by running npm init -y to initialize the project.
In the project root folder (main folder), run npm install superagent
In a file where you want to use superagent, import it: const superagent = require('superagent').
The best thing about npm is that it keeps all the dependencies local, so if module A uses module B v1.3, and module C uses module B v2.0 (with breaking changes compared with v1.3), both A and C will have their own localized copies of different versions of B. This proves to be a more superior strategy than that of Ruby and other platforms that use global installations by default.

The best practice is not to include a node_modules folder in the Git repository when the project is a module that is supposed to be used in other applications. However, it’s recommended to include node_modules for deployable applications to prevent breakage caused by unfortunate dependency updates.

Introduction to npm
There are two ways to install a module:

1) Locally: most of your projects' dependencies which you import with require(), e.g., express, request, hapi. They go into the node_modules directory of your local project

npm install module-name
npm i module-name
2) Globally: command-line tools only (mostly), e.g., mocha, grunt, slc. They go into /usr/local

npm install --global module-name
npm i -g module-name
The i is just an alias to install. There's no difference. Use i to save time typing.

Some frameworks offer CLI, but most of them belong to the local category. Don't try to install express with -g!

The node_modules folder is where dependencies are stored. It's a local folder which must be in the root (first level sub-folder) of your project. node_modules is your friend because it allows for almost no conflicts between different versions of the same dependencies unlike Java, Ruby, Python which prefer global installation over Node's local. Node reduces conflicts because each conflicting dependency will be nested and this will avoid conflicts between different versions of the same dependencies.

Installing Packages
Here are the valid ways in which a Node developer can install an npm module.

Basic installation:

npm install express
Exact version installation:

npm install express@4.2.0
Latest version installation, which can be useful when you already have this module but want to upgrade to the latest module:

npm install express@latest
Explicit save into into package.json dependencies (--save or -S) or devDependencies (--save-dev or -D):

npm install express --save
npm install express -S
npm install mocha --save-dev
npm install mocha -D
In npm version 5, npm will automatically save so npm i express will be the same as npm i -S express. We recommend using the default behavior of npm version 5 which is to save package information into package.json.

By default, npm will add ^ to the version when you use npm v5 or --save. The ^ symbol is dangerous for applications because it means go get the latest version if there's one. It's best to avoid ^. Using the exact flag will do just that:

npm install express --exact
npm install express -E
You can combine flags and install more than one dependency in one command:

npm i react react-dom babel babel-core -ED
Lastly, when you will need to install a tool like npm itself (or upgrade it) you will use the global installation:

npm i -g npm@latest
npm install grunt --global
If you see an error about permissions, you'll need to change the system folder which npm uses to the appropriate permissions or just use root access with sudo:

sudo npm install grunt -g
Semantic versioning consists of using three digits which have certain meaning. For example, in semver 4.2.0, 4 is major, 2 is minor and 0 is patch. Major is for major releases which most often break existing code. Minor are for small releases which can break some code but most often are okay. Patch is for small fixes which should not change the main interface and should not break your applications.

The key word here is should because semantic versioning is not enforced. It's purely a human convention and not all modules and projects in the FOSS follow it.

Listing and Removing Modules
To list what modules are installed, run npm ls from your root project location (where you have package.json and node_modules). It will display a tree of dependencies of this current project.

To list all globally installed modules, run npm ls -g.

To remove an npm module use the rm command:

npm rm mysql
To remove a global module, apply the global flag:

npm rm mysql -g


---------------------------------- 
Package.json
The package.json is the project manifest file. It has all the meta data about the project such as the descriptions, license, location, dependencies, scripts to build, launch and run. Consider this example which has a few dependencies:

{
  "name": "my-cool-app",
  "version": "0.1.0",
  "description": "A great new application",
  "main": "server.js",
  "dependencies": {
    "express": "~4.2.0",
    "ws": "~0.4.25"
  },
  "devDependencies": {
    "grunt": "~0.4.0"
  }
}
In most cases, it's easy to tell what modules are required and what are the main commands and files to execute just by looking at the package.json file.

Package.json is required for npm modules.

Main Properties
Module packaging in Node is done using a package.json file. There are many options that can be configured:

name
version number
dependencies
license
scripts
etc
Creating package.json
To create a package.json file, run npm init command and answer the questions that appear:

$ npm init

This utility will walk you through creating a package.json
file.  It only covers the most common items, and tries to
guess sane defaults.

See `npm help json` for definitive documentation on these
fields and exactly what they do.

Use `npm install <pkg> --save` afterwards to install a package
and save it as a dependency in the package.json file

Press ^C at any time to quit
name: (my-package-name)
If you are okay with the default answers to these questions, then you can skip the questions and answer yes to all of them automatically by using -y flag, as in npm init -y.

Private Modules
The private attribute prevents accidental publishing

{
  "name" : "my-private-module",
  "version": "0.0.1",
  ...
  "private": true,
  ...
}
When to use -g for global installations?
Only use -g for command-line tools which you run from the Terminal /Command Prompt. They usually have bin in package.json:

{
  "name": "stream-adventure",
  "version": "4.0.4",
  "description": "an educational stream adventure",
  "bin": {
    "stream-adventure": "bin/cmd.js"
  },
  "dependencies": {
    ...
In other words, anything which you plan to import with require() must be local in node_modules NOT in global.

----------------------------------------------

npm COnfigurations

npm can be configured in multiple ways:

flags
environment variables
.npmrc files
npm config CLI
The npm config CLI is the easiest way, so let's cover it and take a look at a few examples.

To list current configs:

npm config list 
npm config ls // list configs
To list global configs:

npm config --global list 
npm config -g ls
There are many configurations. For example proxy or registry are the most common ones especially if you are working at a big company that has a corporate proxy and a private (self-hosted) npm registry.

To set any config use use npm config set <key> <value>. For example, to set the registry value use:

npm config set registry "http://registry.npmjs.org/"
You can read an individual setting value. For example to read the registry value use npm config get registry:

npm config get registry
To remove the setting (config), there's a npm config delete <key> command. For example, to remove email:

npm config delete email